Welcome to "Mind Shifts."
"Mind Shift" is unique
talk show because we
take the time to explore
important ideas,
visions, and viewpoints
that the mainstream often
suppresses or marginalizes.
We are interested
in many aspects
of the world and our future.
These include the development
of science and new technologies,
love and relationships,
our planetary ecology,
and the future of
spirituality and religion.
[THEME MUSIC]
Hi, folks.
Welcome back to "Mind Shift."
Right now, I'm here with
Howard Bloom and Richard
Smalley, two authors.
And yeah, I mean, the
fun of the show for me
is that potentially we can
dive into pertinent and unusual
issues that usually don't get
a chance to really hear fully
fleshed out and discussed.
And with Howard and
Richard, we have
kind of different perspectives.
Howard is a scientific
materialist, self-proclaimed
stone cold atheist.
Richard is a scholar
of esoteric traditions
and entered the
Theosophical Society.
So I thought I would start
out with asking you guys,
is there a god?
And if so, what's he doing?
Well, in my humble
opinion-- and this
is my religion we're
talking about right now.
So we're talking about
a system of faith.
My system of faith says
there absolutely is not--
is not a god, period.
However if there
were a god, we're it.
If were-- if there
were a god, it's
our job to do his or her work.
Well, I have two sons
who are three and four
and they asked me
recently what God was.
And since I was just sitting
there in the living room,
I had to come up with something.
So I said, God is where
everything comes from.
God is the source of everything.
And they seem to accept that.
Or at least they didn't
question it too much.
And reflecting on
it, I didn't really
think I was going to
come up with a much
better answer than that.
That is to say, it is that this
source is kind of out of which
we all emerge, including
I-- that is to say,
that in me which says I. You're
never going to see-- this
I is not God, so to speak.
But it's where you
connect with God.
So you're never going
to see it because it's
always what's doing the seeing.
It's a little-- a
difficult-- little
difficult to get your mind
around, but not that difficult.
And you have a book,
the book we talked,
about how consciousness
creates the material world.
You can you explain that
concept a little bit
and see how Howard
resonates with it?
Sure.
Well, the book is
actually called
"The Dice Game of
Shiva-- How Consciousness
Creates the Universe."
And what I do in it, which I
think is interesting at least,
is that I try to give a
definition of consciousness
that's not circular.
That is to say, you can't just
say consciousness is awareness
is perception is consciousness.
I mean, that-- that's
just not a definition.
So the way I define
consciousness,
and I believe it has
the merit of being
non-circular in any rate,
is it's the capacity
to relate self and other.
Without a sense
of self and other,
there's no consciousness.
Deep sleep is an
interesting example.
And we could go into that.
But just to be
simple, in deep sleep,
there's no sense
of self and other.
So we normally say
there's no consciousness.
Well, although according to
the Hindu tradition, isn't deep
sleep consciousness
considered a very deep
level of consciousness
if you can maintain
awareness at that level?
Yeah, that's-- but that's why I
said I didn't want to make it--
I tried to keep it
simple, but you're right.
And there is a level of
consciousness-- even apart
from that, there is a level of
consciousness that's operating
while you're asleep,
you know, which is
the consciousness of the body.
I mean, what-- what is the most
universally prescribed remedy
for all illnesses?
Well, sleep.
You know, sleep
in some way allows
the body to fight out
this-- fight off the other
of these pathogens.
So there is a sense
of self and other.
It's just not what we think
of as waking consciousness.
And the corollary to that is
that our waking consciousness
is just a narrow bandwidth
on a very enormous spectrum
of this capacity to
perceive and respond,
which seems to be
present not only in very
primitive, single
celled organisms,
but in molecules and atoms.
I mean, in some way, a
sodium atom doesn't possess
introspective consciousness
like a, you know,
a Woody Allen
character or something.
But it has the capacity
to, in some way or another,
recognize a chlorine atom and
respond to it in some sort
of way under certain
circumstances that makes
a salt. So if you
look at it that way,
this is all kind of
an enormous continuum.
And I guess what I
would say is God is sort
of what that arises out of.
So it's not a personal
god in the sense that--
or a creator god in the sense
that conventional religion
views it.
But I think there's
something to it.
Well, from a scientific
point of view,
you're posing some very
important questions
that science is not confronting.
And question number
one, let's convert
your first definition of God
to your kids into a question.
How does the cosmos come to be?
If there is a nothing,
how does that nothing
become the singularity, that
infinitesimal pinprick smaller
than a pinprick,
that starts things
off-- the singularity at the
beginning of the Big Bang?
How does the Big Bang
produce time and space?
How does time and space
rushing at super speed--
what is speed to begin with?
How does a mere rush
of time and space
suddenly precipitate
like a storm
cloud precipitating in
raindrops, in quarks,
the very first things?
What are things to begin with?
Why are there only 16
different kinds of things?
If this is a cosmos of 16
monkeys and six typewriters
and it operates on the basis
of probability and statistics,
then there should be,
if there are gazillions
of different things
precipitating
in that first instant,
why aren't there
gazillions of different
kinds of things?
Why are there only 16
different kinds of quarks?
Does this mean we have
to throw out the six
monkeys of the six typewriters?
Does it mean we have to throw
out the mathematics with which
we've been trying to comprehend
the cosmos-- probability
and statistics?
And then let's jump to
a whole other question.
Not just how do new
things come to be
and why did they come
to be in the forms
that they are in--
13.7 billion years
into the history
of the cosmos, how
do we end up with this weird
stuff called consciousness?
What the hell is
it and what is it
in the nature of
that universe that
started with the Big Bang,
time, space, whoosh and things--
Wh-- wh--
What it is-- what--
is it implicit--
what is it that makes it
possible for that universe,
13 billion years more
than that down the line,
to produce consciousness?
What the hell is
consciousness anyway?
These are huge.
What would-- what
would-- what would
be kind of your definition?
Because he offered one--
-Of consciousness?
Yeah.
OK, we have to
distinguish between two
different kinds of science.
One type of science is
observational science.
We look at the things
around us and we
try to make sense of them.
The second is inductive science.
We take a set of
propositions, a set of axioms,
the way we built the
geometric system,
and we pull things from them--
logical things from them.
There's no way in
hell we're going
to get hold of consciousness
through the inductive system.
by going from a
handful of principles.
Well, it's Aristotle in
proposing that we start
with a handful of principals
and then inductively derive
things from there who told us--
start your scientific arguments
with your definitions.
When it comes to observational
science, he's wrong.
Don't start with
your definitions.
Arrive at your definitions
at the end of a long process
of observation.
We have not observed enough
about consciousness in 2013.
We have not come up
with enough concepts
with which to grasp
what consciousness
is in 2013 to even begin
to define consciousness.
All we can do is describe
what we know of it
and try to make sense of it
with things like neurobiology,
pattern recognition,
Gestalt psychology,
the tools of our time.
Well, what do
you think of that?
Well, there's a lot to it
respond to in it, obviously.
One tack I'll take is there's
a Harvard scholar named
E.J. Michael Witzel,
who came out with a book
recently on the world's
mythologies, the origins
of the world's mythologies.
And his argument, which is very
intricate, which I'll summarize
very briefly, is that
they all come back
from the same source,
which is Africa, when
humanity all lived in Africa.
But the mythologies of North and
South America and Eurasia all
have a very, very
similar story to them.
And this is a story of the
origin of the gods, the origin
of the cosmos the origin of the
human race, the ages of man,
complete with last
judgment or Gotterdammerung
or whatever you want to call it.
He says this-- he calls
it the Lorasian mythos,
which I'm not going to
explain at the moment.
But he says it arose
between 20,000 and 40,000 BC
by comparative mythology.
Well, he has no trouble
putting the Judeo Christian
cosmological view into that.
And it fits very
nicely in it where
you have the God creating the
world and the last judgment
and so on.
The only thing that's a
little curious about it,
and he doesn't do
this-- and I suspect
that as a conventional
scholar, he can't-- is like,
wait a minute.
What about our
scientistic picture
of the history of the universe?
Isn't this the same Lorasian
mythos just with the terms
changed and, rather than gods
who may be well or ill disposed
toward us, simply
impersonal forces?
And then this leads to another
question, which is, hey, well,
that's looks a lot
like a human lifetime,
you know, projected
on a universal scale.
So maybe we're just projecting
our own human ingestion
from a seed right down to
demise onto a cosmos again.
And then you ask well, if
that's so, if we can only
see the universe as-- in
purely anthropomorphic terms
regardless of our worldview,
can we ever see, you know,
anything out there?
Are we always just limited
to seeing the world
as a human would see the world?
There is a big
argument in my new book,
in "The God Problem,"
about anthropomorphism
versus anthropocentrism.
And in science, we're
often criticized
for being anthropomorphic.
We're criticized for
seeing human patterns
and seeing the universe through
those patterns, which means,
are we really
seeing the universe?
And the book makes the
case, "The God Problem"
makes the case,
that in fact this
is an anthropocentric
point of view.
It takes it for granted that
things like will and death
are unique to humans.
But what if they are
not unique to humans?
When you've got that
cosmos we talked
about at the very beginning
with the Big Bang,
there's a big woomph
to that universe.
There is a big rush
forward to that universe.
There was a drive and an impulse
to that universe that takes it
through the steps of Big Bang,
time and space, a huge rush,
the precipitation
of the first quarks,
the precipitation of
atoms, the precipitation
of stars and galaxies.
There is something going
on there that is somehow
feels like it's goal directed.
Is all goal directedness
really only in us?
Or is it in us because we
inherited it from our first
ancestors-- that time
and space, that big bang,
in those first quarks?
That's a question that's
not raised in science.
And it has to be-- the idea
that death, for example,
is unique to us and so
we imagine it elsewhere.
Hasn't anybody heard of the
evolution of the first stars?
The first stars,
the really big ones,
only lasted a few million years.
They carried within them the
seeds of their own destruction.
And what did they do after
those first few million years?
They died.
How could we be so arrogant
as to imagine that death is
an experience unique
to us when it's
been going on in this
cosmos for 13 billion years?
That's interesting.
I have another question
about the whole
of scientistic perspective.
I just want to point
out that your perspective
actually sounds almost more
religious than his in a sense.
Because you're-- you're
beginning to propose that there
are these kind of personality
traits to the-- to the cosmos
as a whole.
But go ahead.
Well, one thing I'm curious
about with the scientific
perspective, which is science
has been very, very preoccupied
with finding out how
consciousness arises
from the brain, now
it hasn't really
found out how to do that yet.
I think it seems to be
agreed that the structures
of the brain and the nervous
system structure consciousness
and our experience of reality
in certain sort of way.
So is there any
possible way in which
we are ever going to, you know,
see the universe as it is?
It's always going to be
limited through this brain.
And why-- see,
the thing about it
is that sometimes science
talks in a very consciousness
is limited by the
brain and all that.
But there are times when
it talks in terms of almost
like a naive realism.
What we perceive is
really out there.
It's really like
objective reality.
And those two
points of view often
seem to contradict each other.
Well, you bring up
a really, really,
really good point
about are we ever going
to understand
consciousness simply
by understanding the brain.
Aristotle laid out a program
in 2300-- 2300 years ago,
roughly 300, 315 BC.
And he said if you reduce
things to their elements,
and then use a really
weird metaphor.
He have just said metaphor
is illegal in science.
But he used a really
weird metaphor.
He said, if you find the laws
of those elements-- laws?
I mean, you know,
things Hamurabi
carved-- had carved in stone?
Those things that
dictate human behavior?
Doesn't he realize
this is a metaphor
and a very strange one
for elements of reality,
whatever reality is?
He said, if you find the
laws of these elements,
you will know how
everything works.
Well, unfortunately, he was--
and by the way, those-- that's
where we get the
phrase elementary laws,
from two pages in one
book by Aristotle.
And we've been following
that program ever since.
Guess what?
It's called reductionism,
that program.
It doesn't work.
Two days ago on C-SPAN,
a physicist from NYU
was trying to discuss all the
things that we obviously know
about how the cosmos works.
And he said, it's very obvious
that if we understand the laws
that govern the atoms and the
molecules in a basketball,
we'll understand how
a basketball works.
And then he said,
but of course, when
we're bouncing a basketball,
it's a whole different set
of laws that we appeal to.
Then he somehow made
it look as if that's
because we understand
the basic laws of how
the atoms and molecules work.
No, he had just said that
understanding the basic laws
of how the atoms
and molecules work
gets us nowhere in understanding
how to bounce the basketball.
Because there are
larger scale realities
that come forth from
these smaller scale things
that you can't
describe by breaking
things down to their
elements and finding
the laws of the elements.
And he's so used
to current science
think-- science as a religion,
science as a catechism--
that he didn't recognize
the contradiction
in what he had just said.
There are larger
scale realities.
Right now, we call them
emergent properties
for want of a better word.
They are friggin amazing.
Stars, galaxies, consciousness--
they did not come logically
from the smaller units.
But they do come from somewhere.
And finding things that
come from somewhere
is the ultimate job of science.
The ultimate goal of
science is to have
an aspiration
toward omniscience,
to have an aspiration
to know everything.
If there is no God, it is our
job to do his work, or hers.
And that means it
is our obligation
to recognize questions when
they rise up before our eyes.
The scientist on C-SPAN was
failing to be a scientist when
he failed to recognize
the contradiction
in what he had just
said because he failed
to recognize the question.
And having not recognized
it, he failed to pursue it.
There are large scale
realities of some kind
beyond the elements of
which they are made.
And it's our job in science
to go out and find them.
We disagree on only one small
or seemingly small point.
Oh, how can I be
so [INAUDIBLE] here?
The conversation has
gone a lot of ways.
Yes, I would say it's our
duty to find the truth.
Right.
You know, if only because it
seems like an interesting thing
to do.
-Yes.
I would-- the only
thing I would say
is science is one
of those avenues.
I would not say
science is the avenue.
And the scientific method
is legitimate in, you know,
in a certain way.
We know, for example, that the
boundaries of our perceptions
are limited, right?
There's a certain
span of the spectrum
that we can see with our eyes.
There's another wider
spectrum that we can perceive
with instruments
that we've used,
so to speak, to
expand our vision.
We have no reason to believe
that these limits here
or our instruments are the
limits of the totality.
And it may well be that science
will extend them further.
Then you sort of come to
the question as like, well--
and I'm certainly not the
first person to say this.
But science then starts
to look like, you know,
metaphysics and occultism
and all that kind of things.
Well, well, what would you say
are some of the other avenues?
-Oh--
-Can I answer that?
No, no, no.
Because it's in
"The God Problem."
Move your head.
No, no, no, let him-- let him
give it a shot and see what--
Go ahead.
Well, certainly mystical
cognitive experience,
introspection social
interaction, art, music,
literature, all of these
things are in a sense avenues
to knowledge that are, you
know, not scientific as such.
I would say religion also.
Religion offers certain
insights that science doesn't.
So I would just say that
the method of inquiry
has to encompass
everything we can think of.
And you'll see a very
methodical statement
of that in "The God Problem."
And "The God Problem" says
that we humans operate
with symbolic systems, symbolic
systems based on what Aristotle
outlawed as anti-scientific--
metaphor, the very thing he
was using when he
talked about laws
applying to elements of things.
He was using metaphor.
And we have a set of
metaphorical tools,
a set of metaphorical systems.
And they're exactly
what you talked about.
They consist of religion, art,
human interaction, not just
science.
He also was saying that
perhaps science is-- is trapped
in those metaphorical
systems just as much
as these other disciplines.
And I won't let science
be trapped in those things.
I absolutely won't.
Because I was born into science.
Science saved my life.
Science is my religion.
It's my job to make sure
science lives up to what
science has to be, even
though I'm a pipsqueak
and may never be heard.
The fact is that it
is our obligation,
if we can grasp things
only with mysticism,
grasp them, for God's sakes.
Bring them into the realm
of symbolic expression,
then toss them over to
the scientific brain
to ponder and to figure out.
If poetry is the only
way of grabbing them,
grab them, for God's sakes.
It may be that
there are other forms
of technique that are
scientific ultimately in nature.
We just haven't really
defined their parameters yet.
I mean, for instance, we were
talking before-- both of us
touched on in our previous
discussions paranormal
or psychic experience.
And we were talking
about-- and you mentioned,
as I've had, certain
experiences that seem to confer
the existence of
psychic experience
and even the
ability of our minds
to interact and affect and
transform physical reality
in ways that to-- to
an objective scientific
perspective or whatever
objective means
would seem totally impossible.
And-- and your-- your attitude
was to kind of reject that
almost summarily and say,
as far as you're concerned,
that's very unlikely.
But once upon a, time sometime
between about 1810 and 1830,
one of the British scientists
did something weird.
He had a horseshoe--
magnetism had
been something that
had been preoccupying
science since 1650.
He had a magnet on his desk.
He put a piece of
paper on the magnet.
Somehow, a bunch of iron filings
fell onto the piece of paper.
And whammo, he saw all of
these concentric rings of iron
filings around the magnet.
There was clearly something
there that had been
invisible-- invisible to
220 years of scientists
or something like
that up to that point
and that nobody in
science, including
me, if I'd been around at the
time, would have believed in it
all.
And it was there.
We call it magnetic force.
We take it for granted now.
It was a whole invisible
force we didn't see.
And it is entirely possible that
some time in the next 10 to 100
years, somebody is going to
come up with the equivalent
to another piece of paper and
another batch of iron filings.
And whammo, all of a sudden,
forces that are invisible to us
that we don't talk about
in science that we've never
perceived are going to
come whopping into reality
and are going to
become a normal fact
of every day scientific life.
But right now, as a
scientific thinker,
I prefer to deal with the
things I know are there
and the challenge of trying
to understand things in terms
of them and the challenge
of trying to understand
these large scale patterns like
consciousness, like a star,
like a galaxy, that
emerge in spite
of the limits of the elementary
laws, the holistic patterns,
the gestalt patterns.
What the hell are they?
Where do they come from?
Why?
How?
Those are the questions
I'm trying to pose
and even find a vocabulary for.
You know, you certainly raise
a lot of interesting issues.
I think one thing
that, you know,
always needs to be borne in
mind is a point that you made
in an earlier segment, which
is there is an enormous amount
of groupthink among scientists.
And you used it in regard
to the global warming
issue, which is fascinating.
And I wouldn't be
surprised if there
was at least some very strong
element of truth in that.
But it's certainly the case
in terms of parapsychology.
It's certainly the case
that they did that did
all of these experiments.
You know, they used to
do card guessing games--
the J.B. Rhine Duke experiment.
Right, and I used to
follow those week by week.
And, well?
They don't do them
anymore because they
ceased to be interesting.
They replicated the results.
There is some small
element beyond chance.
So they don't do that anymore.
But it's as if none of this
ever happened and the idea is,
like, well, you know, the
scientistic materialists--
and I'm not including
you among them,
at least for this
purpose, you know.
We're just-- ah, the--
the studies are flaws.
Ah, somehow, they're flawed.
Yeah, we're up against
a problem in science.
Science as a community.
Yeah.
And communities do a lot
of conformity enforcing,
even though it is
antithetical to science,
absolutely against science,
to do conformity enforcing.
And I know-- you know, I'm
an outsider in this community
because I'm continually trying
to raise questions that it's
not considered polite to raise.
Nonetheless, I know that if I
went far enough out into space
to start bringing up the
JB Rhine stuff of my youth,
all the psychological studies
of my youth, the stuff
at Princeton University that
indicated that you actually
could have an influence
on physical objects--
a small, statistically
measurable influence
on physical objects-- if I
were to bring that stuff up,
that small amount of credibility
I need in order to raise
questions in the
scientific community
would disappear immediately.
And as a consequence,
these are things
I just have to stay away from.
Even I who try to do
everything in my power
to be courageous
and take chances
know that there's
only so far I can go.
But I would go there if I felt
it was going to be productive.
Instead, I'd rather go where
you go, with [INAUDIBLE]
and with my own experiences
with peyote and LSD,
which admittedly I only
did twice in my life
for each of those things.
But these things expanded
the realm of my consciousness
and I know there is
a truth and a reality
there that I can
bring back to science.
So I have to choose which
things to be outrageous about.
Well, that's-- I mean
that's very, very sobering.
Because of course,
to my knowledge,
you don't have, like,
a job at a university
that could be threatened by,
you know, something, like this.
Right, and if I had
a job at a university,
I would be far more constrained.
And that's why I'm
so incredibly lucky
that I don't have a conventional
scientific position.
Yeah, it's--
But then considering
all of that,
why take such a negative stance
as what you did in your earlier
episode where you're kind of
like-- when I brought it up,
you were kind of, like, pushing
it away with such force,
which is so much the
condescending attitude that you
get from most people who
are in the scientific
world view about psychic
experience or paranormal--
Because of all the
years-- remember,
this was extremely
popular when I was a kid.
And I did get into science
at the age of 10, which
means that I got in in 1953.
And that means that in
the first six or seven
years of my
immersion in science,
this was a very strong current.
I never found
anything useful in it.
Did I find anything
useful in peyote?
Immediately-- immediately,
the doors of perception
started opening, to use
Aldous Huxley's phrase.
But-- but-- but useful is
different than true, no?
I never found anything
that rang true in it.
Now, one day when I was 18
and had dropped out of school
and was seeking Satori
Zen Buddhist enlightenment
and people were dropping
out of their jobs
and following me, I was alone in
a great big coal car on the way
from God knows
what-- what railroad
town in-- in
California to Nevada--
a long trip and a painful one.
And coal cars have a--
Maybe-- maybe you're
next to be the next--
you're meant to
be the next world
avatar or kalki but you've got
kind of distracted by science.
Well, here's what happened.
The coal cars and
freight cars in general
do not have any
suspension system.
So you cannot sit.
You have to stand or you
would bounce like this.
Your ass would hit that
metal over and over again.
It would be horribly disruptive.
So you stand the whole way.
Because it's a coal
car, there's coal.
It's sweeping from
the rear of the car up
to the front
convection currents,
then going up
above the car's rim
and coming back at
65 miles an hour.
Your followers must have
been kind of pissed at you.
Well, so you're--
you're being-- your face
is being sand blasted by coal.
And when-- when
the coal car stops,
the way they get the
coal out of the car
is that the entire floor is
six huge flaps with levers.
The lever holds
the flap in place.
At a certain point
after three hours
standing in this coal car being
sandblasted, I had a feeling.
And I decided to
move my knapsack
and myself from the left front
flap to the right front flap.
10 minutes later, there
was an enormous clang.
And that flap I had been
standing up for 3 and 1/2 hours
flapped open.
If I'd still been standing
there, I'd be a hamburger
or I would have
been a hamburger.
I would have disappeared
a long time ago.
I wouldn't be here with you.
Is that a paranormal experience?
I've had a number of them.
I don't know.
But it doesn't have
that ring of truth.
It gives me the feeling that it
will provide a tool with which
I can understand things.
And peyote did.
And LSD did, even though
I only did them twice.
So sometimes, you
feel that something
is going to be something
that you can use
to pry a reality out of
the wall of a coal mine
and turn into an
object of amazement.
And sometimes, they
don't impress you
as being those kinds of tools.
And you have to pass on the
ones that don't feel like tools.
Well, I would say if any
instincts or intuition
or whatever you want to call
it would be considered useful,
that would be one of them.
I-- I-- you know, it doesn't
get more useful than that.
But we don't know that.
You know, another thing I think
that-- that is worth mentioning
is for the sake of analysis,
we divide the senses
into these various categories.
This is, you know, sensory.
This is olfactory, so on, so on.
They're obviously not
very well distinguished.
You know, the sense of
taste and sense of smell
are inexplicably linked, yeah.
And I have to say
that what a lot of we
think of with intuition, kind
of gut feeling, you know,
is-- is not necessarily all
that radically different
from the other senses.
It's just one that we, you
know, for various reasons,
have-- have chosen not to
pay attention to or develop.
So there-- there's-- to
what extent you're feeling
someone's eyes on
the back of your head
is some kind of extension
of peripheral vision.
Maybe you did catch a glance.
I think there are two-- I
think there are at least two--
Do you know that book that
[INAUDIBLE] did about man's
possible future evolution
where he talked about how
our intuitive
faculties, our cognitive
faculties that just are
so much faster than our--
than our rational
faculties, they're
like in another
category altogether.
Yeah, I think
they're sufficiently
different to make a difference.
I want to wrap up soon, but
go ahead and make your comment.
Well, one day-- OK, one
day, my friend Val Geiss
who's a leading
expert on large animal
be-- one of the leading
experts on large animal
behavior in the world was
doing what Val Geiss does.
Six months of the year, he puts
on a knapsack, gets a rifle,
and goes up into the mountains
and follows the mountain
sheep and lives like a mountain
sheep and lives off the land.
Every once in a while, Val
would encounter a grizzly bear.
And Val loves it when he
encounters grizzly bears.
Because this is a
status hierarchy match.
It's to see who's the
biggest guy on the block.
And the grizzly bear
stands up on his hind legs
and makes a great
big show and says,
I'm the biggest
guy on the block.
And I'm going to terrify you.
And Val gets up on his
hind legs and says,
I'm the biggest
guy on the block.
I'm going to terrify you.
And it's a showdown.
Well, one day, it wasn't
a male grizzly bear
Val ran against-- up against.
He ran across a
female grizzly bear.
And he'd come too
close to her cubs.
And she's not in this for show.
She's in this to
protect her cubs.
So she took after
Val like a mad woman.
And all of a sudden, Val had
an out of body experience.
And it felt to him as if his
consciousness was perching
on a tree watching
as he saw his body
scampering across the
landscape looking for a tree
he could climb and then climbing
that tree until he got high
enough that he could go
out on a branch confident
that he was high above
the grizzly bears head
and do a victory dance over her
head hanging from the branch.
OK, now, Val and I are
materialist scientists, right?
So what do we think about
out of body experiences?
We have to come up
with a materialist
or a biological explanation.
And here's the explanation
we came up with.
And it relates to the difference
between intuition and reason.
In the brain,
normally, things that
are coming in from
the outdoors--
you know, sensory
experiences-- they
come up to the limbic system.
And then they're pursed out to
the cortex to be figured out.
Then, once the cortex
figures them out,
it sends messages back to move
your arms, move your legs.
And the gap when the mind
is figuring things out
is point 0.4 of a second--
4/10 of a second, a little bit
less than half a second.
Now, under normal
circumstances, you
can afford that extra
half a second of time.
But when the grizzly bear is
really out to end your life
and she's moving as fast as
she possibly can, you cannot
afford that extra half second.
So what happens?
The stuff we call intuition,
the nonverbal senses,
take over entirely.
And they park your
conscious self anywhere
you want to fantasize being.
Local tree?
Fine.
Cloud in the sky?
Absolutely fine, just
get out of the way.
Why?
So the incoming stuff can
go up to the limbic system
and go directly to the outcoming
stuff and not lose your life.
So there are at least two
perceptual systems in there.
And they do operate on an
entirely different frame.
Whether they have radically
different perceptions
of the world or
not, if we weren't
coming to the end
of the episode,
I could tell you another story.
Let's get Richard's response.
Well, yeah, the
whole thing about it
is it's all very
well and good to talk
in terms of brain states.
But are you really
going to reduce it
to a question of brain state?
For example, let's take
something much simpler,
which is-- well, let's
take something which
is much more complicated
for a minute,
like the experience of God.
There are people who say, well,
there are some bunch of neurons
in your brain
that, you know, you
buzz it with an electrode will
produce an experience of God.
Hence, the experience of God is
just something in your brain--
all well and good.
It's also the case that if
you took the same electrode
and prodded a different
corner of the brain
that you would have an
experience of light.
We don't conclude from
that that light is
just a delusion of the brain.
It may be.
And I think we would have to
ask that question as seriously
about physical
experiences like that
as we would about
religious experiences.
But anyway, that's--
that's what comes to mind.
Mm-hm, I like that very much.
OK, guys.
For the last question,
I'm going to ask you guys
to reverse your position, OK?
Howard, can you tell
us-- pretend for a moment
that you've had direct mystical
experiences that totally
convinced you of
the unitive nature
of consciousness and
that consciousness
underlies physical reality.
What would be your
best concise argument
to a scientific
materialist to convince
them that they're wrong?
Well, I would say,
how in the world
do you think this
universe got here?
There's obviously a unity
of some kind that's utterly
beyond our grasp at the moment.
And if there is, in
fact, a divinity,
the divinity is in every single
quark, every single force,
of this universe.
And the grand totality then,
absolutely astonishing--
many totalities layered
with another totalities
of which it consists.
And those things are so
far beyond your [INAUDIBLE]
as a mere scientist that there
is no way you can even claim
that your science covers any
more than the small grain
of reality on a big, big beach.
Nice-- and Richard, pretend
that you're a arch scientific
materialist having to convince
somebody who has a mystical
belief system that
there is no such thing
as god or a divine source.
What would be your argument?
Well, these mystical systems
get very, very convoluted.
And they are very elaborate.
And there are a lot of
different religions saying
a lot of different things
that are telling us
that they and they alone
are giving us some sort
of objective view of reality.
They don't often entirely agree.
So, you know, I have
to wonder about that.
I have to kind of go also to
kind of an ad hominem argument,
is like, you know,
what kind of results
have we gotten from all
of this religious stuff?
It's often a good excuse for
incredibly brutal behavior.
That's not-- not really
a logical refutation,
but it does bear
on it, particularly
since religion is used as
a underpinning for ethics.
So you have this thing
that underpins ethics
that's-- that's, you
know, seems to be
used to justify all the worst
possible behavior there is.
You know, that alone would give
me some questions about it.
Awesome.
Well, listen-- thank you
so much, both of you,
for coming and-- and hanging
out and-- and chatting with us.
I really appreciate it
Howard, a great pleasure.
-Thanks.
-Richard, a great pleasure.
-That was fun.
-Yeah, yeah.
Hope to see you very soon.